[DerDocs Home](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/DerDocsHome.md)

# Guide to MAKER Genome Annotation Pipeline on Kepler

### Overview
MAKER is a software pipeline written in Perl  designed for annotating whole-genome assemblies but it may also be useful for annotating shorter sequences. MAKER streamlines genome annotation by automatically carrying out processes such as sequence alignment, ab initio gene prediction, handling intermediate data files, and synthesizing final annotations from multiple lines of evidence. It is meant to be run iteratively (run the pipeline multiple consecutive times in the same directory), and can update and extend existing genome annotations, a process that works best if the existing genome annotation was created by MAKER. Protein-coding gene annotations are expected to be most complete if a combination of transcriptome, proteome, and HMM-based predictions are used. Repeat loci are annotated and some are classified by RepeatMasker if classifications are present in the repeat database used; Repbase is a good repeat database to include and this can be supplemented with a de novo set of consensus repeat sequences generated by RepeatModeler (separate from MAKER). tRNA and rRNA can be identified as part of a MAKER run by turning on the relevant options and adding the relevant paths to maker_exe.ctl.

------
------

### Loading MAKER
MAKER is installed both locally (`/home/joshd/software/`) and globally (`/share/apps/genomics/`). The global installation is probably less reliable than the local one. If you don't already have one, you may need to create or copy a local module file for maker. Information about how to set up your module environment is in [KeplerModules.md](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/KeplerModules.md)

To load MAKER, type

`module load local/maker`

A message should print with the MAKER version number and a short description. This information is hardcoded in the maker module file at 

------
------

### Setting up your MAKER space
It's best to create a new directory in which to run MAKER from. When ready to start the run, this directory will contain three control files, your PBS/torque/qsub/shell script to submit to the resource manager TORQUE using `qsub`, explained below. While running, MAKER will generate a very large number of files. Warning: moving a MAKER output directory around in your filesystem takes a very long time.

In this document, $RUNDIR is the location of the hypothetical directory from which MAKER will be executed.

------
------

### Control Files
To generate template control files, from within $RUNDIR and after loading the MAKER module, type `maker -CTL`. This will generate three files:


[maker_opts.ctl](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/maker_opts.md) contains general settings, \
[maker_bopts.ctl](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/maker_bopts.md) contains BLAST settings, \
[maker_exe.ctl](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/maker_exe.md) contains paths to dependency executables.

The syntax for the control files is key=value with # preceeded comments. The control files contain descriptive comments. Here is my explanation of the most important options to know about. Default BLAST settings were chosen because MAKER performed well under them for eukaryotic genomes.

DNA and protein sequences can be provided to MAKER in FASTA or GFF3 format. Below, the FASTA options are shown.

------
#### Selected Options in maker_opts.ctl
###### syntax: `key=value`        e.g., `genome=/path/to/mygenome.fasta`
------

#### DNA sequence (genome assembly)
`genome` \
Required, in FASTA format. Value is a path to a FASTA file.

#### Eu/Pro-karyotic
`organism_type` \
Value is either eukaryotic or prokaryotic.

#### Transcript(ome)s
`est` \
Value is a path to nucleotide FASTA file. Expressed sequences (e.g. EST, mRNA-seq transcripts) MAKER will use mappings of these sequences as as evidence for the existence of genes, and will directly infer models from genes using Exonerate est2genome if est2genome=1.

#### Alt-species transcript(ome)s
`altest` \
Value is a path to nucleotide FASTA file. Expressed sequences (e.g. EST, mRNA-seq transcripts) from a different organism than the one you are annotating. MAKER will use alignments of these sequences as as evidence for the existence of genes, and will directly infer models from genes using Exonerate est2genome if est2genome=1. This option will likley not add much to the annotation if assemble mRNA-seq data are given with `est`.

#### Protein sequences
`protein` \
Value is a path to protein FASTA file. Protein sequences. MAKER will use homology to these proteins as evidence for the existence of genes, and will directly infer models from genes using Exonerate protein2genome if protein2genome=1. The MAKER documentation suggests using "NP" sequences from ref-seq but not unreviewed sequences.

#### Repeat library (TEs, other repeats)
`rmlib` \
Value is a path to nucleotide FASTA file. Repbase is a good start, but de novo libraries can be created with RepeatModeler.

#### TE proteins
`repeat_protein` \
Value is a path to protein FASTA file. Transposable element proteins to assist with masking. A file containing some called `te_proteins.fasta` is included with MAKER at `makerinstalldir/data/`

#### Gene predictor trained HMM
`snaphmm` \
`gmhmm` \
`augustus_species` \
`fgenesh_par_file` \
Value is a path to program-specific HMM file. Necessary for using gene predictors, a trained HMM for on of the four integrated ab initio gene prediction programs: SNAP, Augustus, GeneMark, or FGENESH.

#### Infer gene models directly from sequence alignments
`est2genome` \
`protein2genome` \
Value is 0 or 1. These turn on direct inference of gene models from transcript (`est` & `altest`) and protein (`protein`) sequences, respectively.

#### Annotate tRNA genes
`trna` \
Value is 0 or 1.

#### Annotate rRNA genes
`snoscan_rrna` \
Value is 0 or 1.

#### Run ab initio on unmasked sequence
`unmask` \
Value is 0 or 1. This could be helpful in annotating novel transposons.

#### Number of processors available
`cpus` \
Value is any positive integer. Leave this value at 1 if you are using MPI; that is, running MAKER on multiple nodes simultaneously.

#### Extra stats in GFF3
`pred_stats` \
Value is 0 or 1. By default, only transcripts contain AED and other statistics (QI), while features such as exons do not. Turn it on to get this information for all features.

#### Quality threshold
`AED_threshold` \
Value is a number between 0 and 1. Setting maximum tolerated AED to less than one will result in fewer models of higher average quality.

#### Min protein length from gene predictors
`min_protein` \
Value is a positive integer. Gene predictors can predict many small proteins. Setting this can reduce spurious predictions by ab initios.

#### Find alternate splice forms
`alt_splice` \
Value is 0 or 1. Gene predictors will be trained to find alternative splice forms if this is on, which will be output in the GFF3.

------
#### Paths in maker_exe.ctl
------

Ab initio gene predicion algorithms are only required if being used in your MAKER run.
```
#-----Location of Executables Used by MAKER/EVALUATOR
makeblastdb= #location of NCBI+ makeblastdb executable
blastn= #location of NCBI+ blastn executable
blastx= #location of NCBI+ blastx executable
tblastx= #location of NCBI+ tblastx executable
RepeatMasker=/home/joshd/software/maker/bin/../exe/RepeatMasker/RepeatMasker #location of RepeatMasker executable
exonerate=/home/joshd/software/maker/bin/../exe/exonerate/bin/exonerate #location of exonerate executable

#-----Ab-initio Gene Prediction Algorithms
snap= #location of snap executable
gmhmme3= #location of eukaryotic genemark executable
gmhmmp= #location of prokaryotic genemark executable
augustus= #location of augustus executable
fgenesh= #location of fgenesh executable
tRNAscan-SE= #location of trnascan executable
snoscan= #location of snoscan executable
```

------
------

### Command Line Options and Submission Script

```
#!/bin/bash
#PBS -k oe
#PBS -N JobName
#PBS -q q40
#PBS -j oe
#PBS -m ea
#PBS -M mcsimenc@csu.fullerton.edu
#PBS -l nodes=1:ppn=40

module load local/maker
module load local/trnascan
module load openmpi

cd /home/derstudent/data/santalales/annotation_all_taxa


echo "START"
date

mpirun -n 40 maker maker_bopts.ctl maker_exe.ctl maker_opts.ctl 1>maker.err 2>maker.log

echo "END"
date
```

------
------

### Output

------
------

### MAKER Accessory scripts

------
------

### Training Gene Predictors

------

#### SNAP

------

#### AUGUSTUS

------
------

### Example MAKER Protocol

What we did for Azolla and Salvinia.

------
------

### Manipulating GFF3-Format Files

------

#### Adding Attributes

------

#### Renaming Attributes

------

#### Command-Line Pipeline Examples For Extracting Information From GFF3

------

#### Creating Tracks For Circos

------

#### Feature-Coordinate Arithmetic With BED-Format

------
------


[DerDocs Home](https://github.com/mcsimenc/DerLab/blob/master/DerDocsHome.md)
